pars prima encyclopaediae,
in qua enarrantur
quatuor praecognita disciplinarum,
hox ordine:
i. hexilogia. 
ii. technologia.
iii. archelogia.
iv. didactica.

"The first part of the encyclopedia, in which are explained the four precursors of the disciplines, in this order: i. hexilogy. ii. technology. iii. archaeology. iv. didactics."

praefatio
in
quatuor libros praecognitorum.

"Preface to the four books of precursors" or "Introduction to the four books of precursors."

calumniam patiuntur, vel, vt mollius dicam, apud multos vapulant scriptores praecognitorum, qud nulla de causa onerent iuuentutem longis hisce logis. Quis enim non intelligat naturam disciplineae, modumque studii, definitio & diuisio, qae atuam disciplinae explicant, in methodo ipsius primum occupant locum; & eaipsa methodusest via compendiaria, qua potest & debet doceri atque dici quaelibet facultas, ars, & scientia.
merito itaque tautologiae se alligare iudicantur, quioperosa illa disciplinarum praecognita in publicum scribunt.
atque haec est oratio illorum, qui laudens breuitatis hodie apud nonnullos habent.
videamus, quam recte.
naturam disciplinae cogosci dictitant ex eius definitione ac diuisione, quae vtique sunt partes disciplinarum.
non itaque opus est, naturam disciplinae in peculiari aliquo tractatu explicare.
sed non animaduertunt boni illi viri, praecognita disciplinae duobus modis dici.
et primo quidem sunt praecognita quaedam interna & domestica, quae in ipsis disciplinarum visceribus collocantur.
huiusmodi sunt definitio & diuisio cuiusque disciplinae. 
neque enim disciplinam tenere putandus est is, qui definitionem & divisionem ipsius habet cognitam.
deinde sunt praecognita externa, quae praemittuntur disciplenis tanquam <greek>, vt animus discentis praeparetur ad capessendum eas, quae promittuntur in praecognitis internis, hoc est, in definitione atque diuisione disciplinae.
Istius autem modi praecognita sunt numero quatuor, quibus tanquam rotis currus disciplinarum feliciter procedit.
Oportet enim ante omnia & in antecessum, vt loquuntur, cognoscere, qualis tandem habitus sit disciplina, quae docenda & discenda proponitur.
atque hoc explicat nostra hexilogia.
deinde, quia habitus mentis sunt multi, ut in hexilogia discimus, necesse est, ut technologia disciplinas ad certa veluti iuga alliget, vel sub sua signa vocet, ut ipsarum conuenientia & differentia possit obseruari.
et haec quidem discendi ratio est vel maxime secundum naturam.
si quis enim adijciat animum ad capessendum ea, quae in aliqua disciplina tranduntur, id sibi proculdubio proponit, vt habitvm comparet in illa, quam aggreditur, facultate.
huc accedit, quod disciplina est habitus mentis, dirigens praecipuas hominis facultates ad cognitionem veri, vel actionem boni.
non itaque nugas agunt, qui doctrinam de habitibus mentis methodice proponunt, illique subiungunt institutionem de varietate disciplinarum. 
verum enum uero frustra est omnis ille labor, si non habeamus cognita principia & fundamenta, quibus illi habitus superstrui debent. 
tertia itaque currus nostri rota succedit, archelogia sed fac haec omnia ex ipsarum disciplinarum praeceptis posse deriuari. 
annon omnes artes & scientiae habent commenum aliquam definitionem, parplicet eae, quae omnibus disciplinis sunt communia, quis non videt tria ista praecognita non esse de tribu sua mouenda?
quid vero te siet, didactica?
nam si ars ipsa sui docendi & discendi est certissima methodus, nihil opus est aliam studij rationem, siue methodum, praescribere.
sed hic iterum impingitur in eum, de quo paulo ante diximus, lapidem. 
methodus discendi artem alia est interna, alia externa.
interna, est ipsa praeceptorum series, medulla, substantia.
externa persequitur circumstantias in discenda ista methodo seruandas: quale videlicet ingenium requiratur in discente, quo temporis spatio ars posit addisci, quo loco, ex quibus authoribus.
haec itaque, & his fimilia, non in ipso artis theatro fiue scena, sed in proscenio proponenda fuerint sed iam ipsa praecognita tradamus.

"
They endure calumny, or, to put it more mildly, as many well-versed writers complain, they suffer harshly because of these long-winded passages that burden the youth without reason. For who does not understand that the nature of discipline, the manner of study, the definition and division that explain the nature of the discipline itself, occupy the first place in its method? And this very method is the shortcut by which any faculty, art, and science can and should be taught and learned.
Therefore, they are rightly judged to bind themselves to tautology, those who write these laborious precognitions of disciplines for the public. And this is the argument of those who, today, have praise for brevity among some.
Let us see how rightly.
They insist that the nature of discipline is known from its definition and division, which are indeed parts of the disciplines. Therefore, there is no need to explain the nature of discipline in a particular treatise. But those good men do not notice that the precognitions of discipline are said in two ways.
First, there are some internal and domestic precognitions, which are placed in the very bowels of the disciplines. Such are the definition and division of each discipline. For he should not be considered to possess discipline, who has known the definition and division of it.
Then there are external precognitions, which are prefixed to disciplines as if <Greek>, so that the mind of the learner may be prepared to undertake those things which are promised in the internal precognitions, that is, in the definition and division of the discipline. Precognitions of this kind are in number four, by which the chariot of disciplines proceeds successfully as if on wheels.
For it is necessary, above all and in advance, as they say, to know what kind of habit the discipline, which is proposed to be taught and learned, is. And this is explained by our hexilogy.
Furthermore, since there are many habits of the mind, as we learn in hexilogy, it is necessary for technology to bind disciplines to certain, as it were, yokes, or to call them under its own banners, so that their agreement and difference can be observed. And this method of learning is according to nature.
For if anyone applies his mind to undertake what is taught in any discipline, he undoubtedly proposes to himself to acquire the habit in that faculty in which he engages.
In addition, because discipline is a habit of the mind directing the principal faculties of man to the knowledge of truth or the performance of good, those who methodically propose teaching about habits of the mind and attach instruction about the variety of disciplines do not engage in trivial matters. Indeed, all that labor is in vain, if we do not have known principles and foundations on which those habits should be built.
Thus, the third wheel of our chariot succeeds, but let archelogy make all these things derivable from the precepts of the disciplines themselves.
Do all arts and sciences have a common definition, especially those that are common to all disciplines? Who does not see that these three precognitions should not be moved from their tribe?
But what about didactics? For if the art of teaching and learning itself is the most certain method, there is no need to prescribe another method or manner of study. But here again, it comes up against the stumbling block we mentioned a little while ago. The method of learning is one thing, internal to the art, and another is external. 
Internal is the very series of precepts, the essence, the substance. The external one follows the circumstances to be observed in learning by this method: what kind of intellect is required in the learner, how long the art can be learned, in what place, from which authors. Therefore, these and similar things should have been presented not in the theater or stage of the art itself but in the proscenium. But now let us present the precognitions themselves.
"