
encyclopaediae liber primvs, exhibens hexilogiam, id est, doctrinam de habitibus mentis.
The First Book of the Encyclopedia, Presenting Hexilogy, That is, the Doctrine of Habits of the Mind

caput primum.
chapter one.

de necessitate atque causis habituum intellectualium.
On the Necessity and Causes of Intellectual Habits

praecepta.
teachings.

encyclopaedia est methodica comprehensio rerum omnium in haec vitae homini discendarum.
Encyclopedia is the systematic comprehension of all things to be learned in this human life.
itaque non immerito appellaueris pandectas, & universitatem disciplinarum.
So you have not unjustly called them 'pandects' and the university of disciplines.
eius duo sunt summa capita: primnm, de praecognitis omnium disciplinarum; alterum, de ipsismet disciplinis.
Its two main chapters are: the first one, about the precognitions of all disciplines; the other, about the disciplines themselves.

praecognita omnium disciplinarum sunt institutio anticipata, praeparams animum discentis ad faciliorem disciplinarum intelligentiam.
The precognitions of all disciplines are a pre-established instruction, preparing the mind of the learner for an easier understanding of the disciplines.

partes ipsorum duae sunt: prima, de naturae disciplinarum, altera de ipsarum studio.
"The two parts of the disciplines themselves are: the first, about the nature of the disciplines, and the other about the study of them."

natura disciplinarum cognoscitur ex ipsarum varietate, ac firmitate.
"The nature of disciplines is known through their variety and stability."

varietas disciplinarum est quantum ad habitus mentis, & ipsa disciplinarum genera. Ibi est hexilogia: hiec, technologia.
"The variety of disciplines pertains to the habits of the mind and the very kinds of disciplines themselves. This is where hexilogy comes in; here, it's technology."

hexilogia est primum e quatuor praecognitis disciplinarum, de habitbus intellectualibus.
"Hexilogy is the first of the four precognitions of disciplines, concerning intellectual habits."

habitus intellectuales sunt qualitates, quae determinant intellectum ad facilius percipiendum sua obiecta, id est omnia intelligibilia.
"Intellectual habits are qualities that enable the intellect to perceive its objects more easily, that is, all intelligible things."
dicuntur eodem sensu habitus mentis, [greek]; & virtutes intellectuales.
"They are called in the same sense habits of the mind, [Greek], and intellectual virtues."

habitus isti spectantur in genere, & in specie. unde hexilogia est generalis, vel specialis.
"These habits are considered in terms of genus and species. Therefore, hexilogy is either general or specific."

hexilogia generalis edisserit habituum intellectualium necessitatem, causas, & divisiones generales.
"General hexilogy explains the necessity, causes, and general divisions of intellectual habits."

necessitas habituum intellectualium alia est ratione discentis, alia ratione disciplinarum.
"The necessity of intellectual habits is understood in one way from the perspective of the learner and in another way from the perspective of the disciplines."
Ibi est imperfection hominis: hiec perfectio disciplinae.
"Here is the imperfection of humanity: there is the perfection of the discipline."

causae habituum intellectualium aliae sunt supra hominem, uti est gratio dei: intra hominum, uti sunt natura, doctina, & exercitatio.
"The causes of intellectual habits are some above humanity, such as the grace of God, and others are within humanity, such as nature, learning, and practice."

